KEP-3094: take toleration/taints into considering when computing skew (#3105)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3094-pod-topology-spread-considering-taints/README.md

policies including nodeAffinity and nodeTaint.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1
When calculating pod topology spread skew, I want to exclude nodes that don't tolerate
all taints to prevent pods from falling into unexpected Pending state.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> - Looping all the toleration/taints to filter out unsatisfied nodes may

Author: Thanks, I'll replenish this then.

lead to performance problem.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

A new field named `NodeInclusionPolicies` will be introduced to `TopologySpreadConstraint`:
```golang
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
  // NodeInclusionPolicies includes several policies
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew
  NodeInclusionPolicies nodeInclusionPolicies
}
```

There are two policies now regarding to nodeAffinity and nodeTaint:
```golang

> type nodeInclusionPolicies struct {

Reviewer: the type should be exported

>   // Respect nodeAffinity/nodeSelector or not in calculating.

Reviewer: This requires better wording: calculating what? Maybe something like:

Policy for the Pod's node affinity and node selectors when calculating matching pods. The values could be:
- Respect: ....
- Ignore: ....
By default, the policy is Respect.

  // By default we will respect this policy.

>   nodeAffinityPolicy policyName

Reviewer: I would just name it `nodeAffinity` as the parent struct already has the word "policies"

  // Respect all nodeTaints or not in calculating.

>   // By default we will ignore this policy to maintain current behavior.

Reviewer: It should be Ignore, for backwards compatibility

  nodeTaintPolicy policyName
}
```

We will define two policyNames by default:
```golang

> type policyName string

Reviewer: also exported

const (
  // Ignore means ignore this policy in calculating.

>   ignore policyName  = "ignore"

Reviewer: let's brainstorm some words:

- Ignore: Skip
- Respect: Ensure, Check

Author: support current naming

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.mdfd

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->
#### Alpha
- Feature implemented behind feature gate.
- Unit and integration tests passed.

#### Beta
- Feature is enabled by default
- Benchmark tests passed, and there is no performance problem.

> - Gather feedback from developers and surveys.

Reviewer: Are you really going to submit a survey? Generally we don't

#### GA
- No negative feedback.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

- Upgrade

>   - While the feature gate is disabled, field `NodeInclusionPolicies` will be ignored.

Reviewer: It should actually be wiped.

  - While the feature gate is enabled, `NodeInclusionPolicies` is allowed to use by end-users.
  - While the feature gate is enabled, and we don't set this field, default values
  will be configured, which will maintain previous behavior.
- Downgrade

>   - Whatever we enable/disable feature gate, previously configured values will be ignored.

Reviewer: Whenever we disable

team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: PodTopologySpreadTaintPolicy
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-scheduler, kube-apiserver

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->
No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> N/A.

Reviewer: The policies are respected again.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> Yes.

Reviewer: which kinds of tests?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

> A malformed configuration will cause the scheduler failing to start. Running workloads are not affected.

Reviewer: Which configuration can be malformed?

    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

Configuration errors are logged to stderr.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?
N/A

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- 2021.01.12: KEP proposed for review, including motivation, proposal, risks,
test plan and graduation criteria.

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->
N/A

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

> N/A

Reviewer: We considered a couple of things:

- changing the default behavior without introducing control
- check specific taints

-->

A new field named `NodeInclusionPolicies` will be introduced to `TopologySpreadConstraint`:
```golang
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
  // NodeInclusionPolicies includes several policies
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew
  NodeInclusionPolicies NodeInclusionPolicies
}
```

There are two policies now regarding to nodeAffinity and nodeTaint:
```golang
type NodeInclusionPolicies struct {
  // NodeAffinity policy indicates how we will treat nodeAffinity/nodeSelector
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The value could be Respect/Ignore.
  // By default, the policy is Respect.
  NodeAffinity PolicyName
  // NodeTaint policy indicates how we will treat node taints
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The value could be Respect/Ignore.
  // By default, the policy is Ignore for backwards compatibility.
  NodeTaint PolicyName
}
```

We will define two policyNames by default:
```golang
type PolicyName string

const (
  // Ignore means ignore this policy in calculating.
  Ignore PolicyName  = "Ignore"
  // Respect means use this policy in calculating.
  Respect PolicyName  = "Respect"
)

> ```

Reviewer: Where are you going to check the taints? I suspect in PreFilter/PreScore. That should be part of the Design.

Author: Sorry for missed that. Added.

you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: PodTopologySpreadNodePolicies
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-scheduler, kube-apiserver

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->
No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?
The policies are respected again.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> Yes, unit test will switch the feature gate manually to compare the different behavior.

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming tests doesn't exist yet (because the feature doesn't exist), right?
So let's change to something like

"No, appropriate unit tests will be added for Alpha".

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

> N/A

Reviewer 2: It's never N/A. One can easily imagine e.g. a conversion function crashing the kube-apiserver or sth like that.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->
- A spike on metric schedule_attempts_total{result="error|unschedulable"} when pods using this feature are added.
- Metric plugin_execution_duration_seconds{plugin="PodTopologySpread"} larger than 100ms on 90-percentile.
- A spike on failure events with keyword "failed spreadConstraint" in scheduler log.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> N/A

Reviewer 2: It's not N/A - it should definitely be tested. For API changes and things that we actually store in etcd it's especially importnt.
Though not a blocker for now, but it will be for Beta.

Author: thanks Wojciech, updated.

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->
- Checking nodeAffinity and nodeTaints the same time may lead to performance
problem, we need to verify this by adding performance tests. If performance problem
does exists, we'd like to add a toleration parser and cache the parsed object
during PreFilter.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

A new field named `NodeInclusionPolicies` will be introduced to `TopologySpreadConstraint`:
```golang
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
  // NodeInclusionPolicies includes several policies
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew
  NodeInclusionPolicies NodeInclusionPolicies
}
```

There are two policies now regarding to nodeAffinity and nodeTaint:
```golang
type NodeInclusionPolicies struct {
  // NodeAffinity policy indicates how we will treat nodeAffinity/nodeSelector

>   // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The value could be Respect/Ignore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The semantics vary by PolicyName:
  // - Respect (default): nodes matching nodeAffinity/nodeSelector will be included.
  // - Ignore: all nodes will be included.
```

  // By default, the policy is Respect.
  NodeAffinity PolicyName
  // NodeTaint policy indicates how we will treat node taints
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The value could be Respect/Ignore.

>   // By default, the policy is Ignore for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 3: // when calculating pod topology spread skew. The semantics vary by PolicyName:
  // - Respect: tainted nodes that tolerate the incoming pod, along with regular nodes, will be included.
  // - Ignore (default): all nodes will be included.

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.mdfd

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->
#### Alpha
- Feature implemented behind feature gate.

> - Unit and integration tests passed.

Reviewer 3: maybe details the test scope: validation, defaulting, API field's enforcement/removal, functional covering. There should be examples in other KEPs.

Author: I have mentioned [above](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3105/files#diff-aa0d660bdb99fb26c1841308246c49c6e0d268eedb057f9170d3e91b2e3e7154R333-R338), let me updated the words to `Unit and integration tests passed as designed in TestPlan.` Is it enough?

          taintStrategy: "honorAllTaints"

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

- Looping all the toleration/taints to filter out unsatisfied nodes may
lead to performance problem.
- Some usual schedulable nodes may become unschedulable, which might be
confusing for end-users.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> A new field named `TaintStrategy` will be introduced to `TopologySpreadConstraint`:

Reviewer 3: Proposed a similar idea in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/106127#issuecomment-1006207650. Let's get a consensus on how to express its semantics explicitly.

My idea is to add an extendable field that is not limited to "taints".

type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
  // NodeInclusionPolicies includes several policies
  // when calculating pod topology spread skew
  NodeInclusionPolicies NodeInclusionPolicies
}
```

There are two policies now regarding to nodeAffinity and nodeTaint:
```golang
type NodeInclusionPolicies struct {
  // Respect nodeAffinity/nodeSelector or not in calculating.
  // By default we will respect this policy.
  NodeAffinity PolicyName
  // Respect all nodeTaints or not in calculating.
  // By default we will ignore this policy to maintain current behavior.
  NodeTaint PolicyName
}
```

We will define two policyNames by default:
```golang
type PolicyName string

const (
  // Ignore means ignore this policy in calculating.

>   Ignore PolicyName  = "ignore"

Author: thanks, got it.
